Dear Neighbors,

On Thursday morning, our Woodside neighbor, Anne Patelli, spoke with Kathy Bell from the City of Bellingham Planning Department regarding the Squalicum Heights development. Kathy emphasized the importance of community participation and strongly encouraged as many residents as possible to submit detailed and well-articulated concerns about the current plan. The deadline for comments is May 8. Please comment today.

To ensure our voices are heard, please send your feedback via email to squalicumheights@cob.org or directly to Kathy Bell at the City of Bellingham Planning Department. The more input the department receives, the greater the likelihood that our perspectives will be considered in the decision-making process.

While traffic concerns may not be a primary factor in the city's evaluation, Kathy advised that it is still beneficial to include them in your response. Additionally, under a new Washington state law, any single-family lot can now be redeveloped into four-unit lots, which may significantly impact our neighborhood.

If you have suggestions for an alternative access point other than Pebble Place through Woodside, please include them in your comments to the COB Planning Department. Your insights and proposals could be instrumental in shaping a more suitable development plan.

We met with WCA's attorney representing the association as a group and he will be submitting a comment on behalf of the WCA Board. That is not enough. We encourage all residents to take a moment to share their individual thoughts and concerns. Community engagement plays a vital role in ensuring that our neighborhood's interests are represented.

Thank you for your time and dedication to preserving the quality of our community.
Best regards,
---
Group
Here is an important message from the attorney that should be included in the email to all WCA neighbors.

        Here are a couple of main takeaways from a conversation between our attorney and the developer:

         
            First, we inquired about the Magrath Access vs. Pebble Place. Ali mentioned that the City was the main driver of the Pebble Place entrance over Magrath, not the developer. 
                In the pre-application meeting with the City, Public Works was insistent that the Woodside Plat and the engineering of Pebble Place was designed to meet the needs of the future development of the lot.   
                Additionally, the Magrath proposed EVA, since it is only 120 feet from the McLeod intersection, doesn’t meet public works standards (which require 200 feet between intersections). Because Magrath veers off to the east after the proposed EVA access, there is currently no way to move it further south to comply with standards.  Making a change to the current configuration would require the City to approve a variance.
                The City was reticent to even permit the EVA access at Magrath because it crosses a public trail, which provides increased safety concerns for pedestrian trail users.
          
    Second, in our assessment it seems that monetary considerations are not the main driver of the choice of access, based on the above, it seems the City is fairly set in the requirement that Pebble Place remain the main access. 
    Third, Ali mentioned that the development would be supportive (even in writing) of traffic calming measures for the neighborhood.  If these are important to Woodside and might ease some traffic concerns, they could be worth petitioning the City to implement using Traffic Impact Fees to mitigate the project’s impacts.  These could include the following:
        Speed humps or speed bumps
        Stop sign structure changes
        Revisions to uncontrolled intersections
    Finally, we still think the comment letter is an important step in preserving your rights to appeal.  It is important to put on record that the traffic concerns remain top of mind for Woodside residents.  It is our opinion that Woodside residents should attend the public hearing on the project when it is announced.

 

 

 

I also wanted to share some bullet points to provide to members for their individual comment letters to the City:

 

Comment letter submission details:

    Comment letters may be submitted by e-mail or regular U.S. mail.
    All comment letters should include the name and address of the commenters and MUST be submitted to the City by May 8th at 5:00pm. Late comments will generally not be considered.
    Anyone wishing to comment on this proposal is invited to submit written comments to squalicumheights@cob.org or via USPS to Kathy Bell, Planning and Community Development Dept, 210 Lottie Street, Bellingham WA 98225 by 5:00 p.m. on May 8, 2025.

 

Talking points:  While these letters may be about any aspect of the project, they should focus on the contents of the Notice of Application and the SEPA checklist (both attached), additional updated project documents can be viewed here: https://cob.org/project/squalicum-heights. Some general concerns include the following:

 

    Traffic and parking:  The major concern of Woodside is traffic created by the main access on North Pebble Place.  The traffic load on Woodside Way and on North Pebble Place was already projected to increase by 360 trips per day with the addition of 36 single family homes. The additional units proposed, increasing from 36 to 45 will further increase neighborhood traffic concerns with added trips per day, as well as concerns about overflow parking.  Woodside has covenants that restrict Woodside residents from using the streets for storage, but there will be no such constraint on the residents of the new development. There appears to only be 20 parking spaces beyond what is available at each of the 45 proposed units, and no street parking.  This is likely to be insufficient. 

 

    Safety: Increased traffic leads to increased safety concerns for the many households with children playing outdoors, traveling to school, and walking to visit friends and neighbors. The Revised Site Plan still calls for a single public entrance to (and exit from) the Squalicum Heights Development, via Woodside Way and North Pebble Place.  Despite the addition of an emergency vehicle access on the northeast side of the development, most fire, police, and other emergency vehicles will default to the single entrance on North Pebble Place.  The owners in Woodside have already experienced emergency services having difficulty reaching emergencies within Woodside.  We anticipate this problem will only be exacerbated by the addition of 45 densely built homes on a narrow access street.

 

    Character of the neighborhood: The Barkley Neighborhood Plan as adopted by the City states that: “The existing character of the neighborhood, as well as the presence of open space areas, trails and view corridors continue to be valued by neighborhood residents.  Careful consideration in developing zoning designations and in reviewing projects for zoning compliance should continue to emphasize and preserve these characteristics.”  The lot and home sizes of the proposed development are inconsistent with the existing character of the neighborhood and will likely affect the property values of existing homes. Townhomes are likely to be rented, which could lead to less care for the neighborhood.

 

Thanks,